README.md, before:

# BambangShop Receiver App
Tutorial and Example for Advanced Programming 2024 - Faculty of Computer Science, Universitas Indonesia

---

## About this Project
In this repository, we have provided you a REST (REpresentational State Transfer) API project using Rocket web framework.

This project consists of four modules:
1.  `controller`: this module contains handler functions used to receive request and send responses.
    In Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern, this is the Controller part.
2.  `model`: this module contains structs that serve as data containers.
    In MVC pattern, this is the Model part.
3.  `service`: this module contains structs with business logic methods.
    In MVC pattern, this is also the Model part.
4.  `repository`: this module contains structs that serve as databases.
    You can use methods of the struct to get list of objects, or operating an object (create, read, update, delete).

This repository provides a Rocket web framework skeleton that you can work with.

As this is an Observer Design Pattern tutorial repository, you need to implement a feature: `Notification`.
This feature will receive notifications of creation, promotion, and deletion of a product, when this receiver instance is subscribed to a certain product type.
The notification will be sent using HTTP POST request, so you need to make the receiver endpoint in this project.

## API Documentations

You can download the Postman Collection JSON here: https://ristek.link/AdvProgWeek7Postman

After you download the Postman Collection, you can try the endpoints inside "BambangShop Receiver" folder.

Postman is an installable client that you can use to test web endpoints using HTTP request.
You can also make automated functional testing scripts for REST API projects using this client.
You can install Postman via this website: https://www.postman.com/downloads/

## How to Run in Development Environment
1.  Set up environment variables first by creating `.env` file.
    Here is the example of `.env` file:
    ```bash
    ROCKET_PORT=8001
    APP_INSTANCE_ROOT_URL=http://localhost:${ROCKET_PORT}
    APP_PUBLISHER_ROOT_URL=http://localhost:8000
    APP_INSTANCE_NAME=Safira Sudrajat
    ```
    Here are the details of each environment variable:
    | variable                | type   | description                                                     |
    |-------------------------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
    | ROCKET_PORT             | string | Port number that will be listened by this receiver instance.    |
    | APP_INSTANCE_ROOT_URL   | string | URL address where this receiver instance can be accessed.       |
    | APP_PUUBLISHER_ROOT_URL | string | URL address where the publisher instance can be accessed.       |
    | APP_INSTANCE_NAME       | string | Name of this receiver instance, will be shown on notifications. |
2.  Use `cargo run` to run this app.
    (You might want to use `cargo check` if you only need to verify your work without running the app.)
3.  To simulate multiple instances of BambangShop Receiver (as the tutorial mandates you to do so),
    you can open new terminal, then edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` file, then execute another `cargo run`.

    For example, if you want to run 3 (three) instances of BambangShop Receiver at port `8001`, `8002`, and `8003`, you can do these steps:
    -   Edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8001`, then execute `cargo run`.
    -   Open new terminal, edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8002`, then execute `cargo run`.
    -   Open another new terminal, edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8003`, then execute `cargo run`.

## Mandatory Checklists (Subscriber)
-   [x] Clone https://gitlab.com/ichlaffterlalu/bambangshop-receiver to a new repository.
-   **STAGE 1: Implement models and repositories**
    -   [x] Commit: `Create Notification model struct.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Create SubscriberRequest model struct.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Create Notification database and Notification repository struct skeleton.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement add function in Notification repository.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement list_all_as_string function in Notification repository.`
    -   [x] Write answers of your learning module's "Reflection Subscriber-1" questions in this README.
-   **STAGE 2: Implement services and controllers**
    -   [ ] Commit: `Create Notification service struct skeleton.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement subscribe function in Notification service.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement subscribe function in Notification controller.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement unsubscribe function in Notification service.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement unsubscribe function in Notification controller.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement receive_notification function in Notification service.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement receive function in Notification controller.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement list_messages function in Notification service.`
    -   [ ] Commit: `Implement list function in Notification controller.`
    -   [ ] Write answers of your learning module's "Reflection Subscriber-2" questions in this README.

## Your Reflections
This is the place for you to write reflections:

### Mandatory (Subscriber) Reflections

#### Reflection Subscriber-1
1. In this tutorial, we used RwLock<> to synchronise the use of Vec of Notifications. Explain why it is necessary for this case, and explain why we do not use Mutex<> instead?
> In this use case, we are likely to perform a lot of read operations on the Vec of Notifications, and only a few write operations. RwLock<> is a better choice than Mutex<> because it allows multiple readers to access the data concurrently, while only allowing one writer at a time. This is more efficient than using Mutex<> because Mutex<> would block all other threads on any read or write operation, while RwLock<> only blocks write operations.

2. In this tutorial, we used lazy_static external library to define Vec and DashMap as a “static” variable. Compared to Java where we can mutate the content of a static variable via a static function, why did not Rust allow us to do so?
> Rust does not allow us to mutate the content of a static variable because it is not thread-safe. If we mutate the content of a static variable via a static function, it would be possible for multiple threads to access and modify the content of the static variable concurrently, which could lead to issues.

#### Reflection Subscriber-2

Commit message:

Added Reflection 2 on README.md

README.md, after:

# BambangShop Receiver App
Tutorial and Example for Advanced Programming 2024 - Faculty of Computer Science, Universitas Indonesia

---

## About this Project
In this repository, we have provided you a REST (REpresentational State Transfer) API project using Rocket web framework.

This project consists of four modules:
1.  `controller`: this module contains handler functions used to receive request and send responses.
    In Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern, this is the Controller part.
2.  `model`: this module contains structs that serve as data containers.
    In MVC pattern, this is the Model part.
3.  `service`: this module contains structs with business logic methods.
    In MVC pattern, this is also the Model part.
4.  `repository`: this module contains structs that serve as databases.
    You can use methods of the struct to get list of objects, or operating an object (create, read, update, delete).

This repository provides a Rocket web framework skeleton that you can work with.

As this is an Observer Design Pattern tutorial repository, you need to implement a feature: `Notification`.
This feature will receive notifications of creation, promotion, and deletion of a product, when this receiver instance is subscribed to a certain product type.
The notification will be sent using HTTP POST request, so you need to make the receiver endpoint in this project.

## API Documentations

You can download the Postman Collection JSON here: https://ristek.link/AdvProgWeek7Postman

After you download the Postman Collection, you can try the endpoints inside "BambangShop Receiver" folder.

Postman is an installable client that you can use to test web endpoints using HTTP request.
You can also make automated functional testing scripts for REST API projects using this client.
You can install Postman via this website: https://www.postman.com/downloads/

## How to Run in Development Environment
1.  Set up environment variables first by creating `.env` file.
    Here is the example of `.env` file:
    ```bash
    ROCKET_PORT=8001
    APP_INSTANCE_ROOT_URL=http://localhost:${ROCKET_PORT}
    APP_PUBLISHER_ROOT_URL=http://localhost:8000
    APP_INSTANCE_NAME=Safira Sudrajat
    ```
    Here are the details of each environment variable:
    | variable                | type   | description                                                     |
    |-------------------------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
    | ROCKET_PORT             | string | Port number that will be listened by this receiver instance.    |
    | APP_INSTANCE_ROOT_URL   | string | URL address where this receiver instance can be accessed.       |
    | APP_PUUBLISHER_ROOT_URL | string | URL address where the publisher instance can be accessed.       |
    | APP_INSTANCE_NAME       | string | Name of this receiver instance, will be shown on notifications. |
2.  Use `cargo run` to run this app.
    (You might want to use `cargo check` if you only need to verify your work without running the app.)
3.  To simulate multiple instances of BambangShop Receiver (as the tutorial mandates you to do so),
    you can open new terminal, then edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` file, then execute another `cargo run`.

    For example, if you want to run 3 (three) instances of BambangShop Receiver at port `8001`, `8002`, and `8003`, you can do these steps:
    -   Edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8001`, then execute `cargo run`.
    -   Open new terminal, edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8002`, then execute `cargo run`.
    -   Open another new terminal, edit `ROCKET_PORT` in `.env` to `8003`, then execute `cargo run`.

## Mandatory Checklists (Subscriber)
-   [x] Clone https://gitlab.com/ichlaffterlalu/bambangshop-receiver to a new repository.
-   **STAGE 1: Implement models and repositories**
    -   [x] Commit: `Create Notification model struct.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Create SubscriberRequest model struct.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Create Notification database and Notification repository struct skeleton.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement add function in Notification repository.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement list_all_as_string function in Notification repository.`
    -   [x] Write answers of your learning module's "Reflection Subscriber-1" questions in this README.
-   **STAGE 2: Implement services and controllers**
    -   [x] Commit: `Create Notification service struct skeleton.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement subscribe function in Notification service.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement subscribe function in Notification controller.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement unsubscribe function in Notification service.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement unsubscribe function in Notification controller.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement receive_notification function in Notification service.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement receive function in Notification controller.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement list_messages function in Notification service.`
    -   [x] Commit: `Implement list function in Notification controller.`
    -   [x] Write answers of your learning module's "Reflection Subscriber-2" questions in this README.

## Your Reflections
This is the place for you to write reflections:

### Mandatory (Subscriber) Reflections

#### Reflection Subscriber-1
1. In this tutorial, we used RwLock<> to synchronise the use of Vec of Notifications. Explain why it is necessary for this case, and explain why we do not use Mutex<> instead?
> In this use case, we are likely to perform a lot of read operations on the Vec of Notifications, and only a few write operations. RwLock<> is a better choice than Mutex<> because it allows multiple readers to access the data concurrently, while only allowing one writer at a time. This is more efficient than using Mutex<> because Mutex<> would block all other threads on any read or write operation, while RwLock<> only blocks write operations.

2. In this tutorial, we used lazy_static external library to define Vec and DashMap as a “static” variable. Compared to Java where we can mutate the content of a static variable via a static function, why did not Rust allow us to do so?
> Rust does not allow us to mutate the content of a static variable because it is not thread-safe. If we mutate the content of a static variable via a static function, it would be possible for multiple threads to access and modify the content of the static variable concurrently, which could lead to issues.

#### Reflection Subscriber-2
1. Have you explored things outside of the steps in the tutorial, for example: src/lib.rs? If not, explain why you did not do so. If yes, explain things that you have learned from those other parts of code.
> Yes I have, from what I've explored, I learned that the src/lib.rs files contains usefull helper function that helps to load information from .env file and other function that helps in creating a custom error format. This file also contains the configurations for the Rocket app. I also have delve into some of the documentations relating to RwLock and DashMap to understand how they work. From what I've gathered from the documentation, RwLock is a reader-writer lock that allows a number of readers or at most one writer at any point in time. DashMap is a concurrent map that allows multiple readers and writers to access the map concurrently.

2. Since you have completed the tutorial by now and have tried to test your notification system by spawning multiple instances of Receiver, explain how Observer pattern eases you to plug in more subscribers. How about spawning more than one instance of Main app, will it still be easy enough to add to the system?
> The Observer pattern eases the process of plugging in more subscribers because it allows us to add new subscribers without modifying the publisher. This is because the publisher does not need to know the concrete classes of the subscribers, it only needs to know that the subscribers implement the Observer interface. This makes it easy to add new subscribers to the system. On the other hand, spawning more than one instance of the Main app would be more challenging and could cause some issues. For example if we have Publisher 1 and Publisher 2, and we have Subscriber 1 that is subscribed to Publisher 1 but not Publisher 2, we would need to make suer that when Publisher 2 state changes, Subscriber 1 also gets notified. This would require more complex logic and could lead to issues.

3. Have you tried to make your own Tests, or enhance documentation on your Postman collection? If you have tried those features, tell us whether it is useful for your work (it can be your tutorial work or your Group Project).
> I have added some tests to the Postman collection to test the endpoints that I have created. I used it to test multiple subscriptions to the publisher app, and to test the subscription system to listen to multiple product types. I found it useful to test the endpoints that I have created, as it allows me to see if the endpoints are working as expected and if the data is being returned correctly.
